## Comparing the frequency of short DNA sequences among coastal grass populations: A coding exercise for Basic Programing for Life Sciences (CMB 523)

Sea level rise (SLR) in the U.S. northeast is ~3-4 times the global average, increasing at a significantly higher rate than the Pacific or Gulf coasts (Boon, 2012; Sallenger et al., 2012) and compounding the ongoing loss of saltmarsh habitat caused by anthropogenic disturbance. New England has lost 37% of its original saltmarshes, with Rhode Island losing the greatest portion of marsh area among New England states at 53% (Bromberg & Bertness, 2005). Loss of saltmarsh habitat impacts not only ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration (Macreadie et al., 2021; Mcleod et al., 2011), hurricane mitigation (Narayan et al., 2017), wildlife habitat (zu Ermgassen et al., 2021), and nutrient cycling (de Groot et al., 2012), but also jeopardizes genetic diversity in the coastal grasses that serve as ecosystem engineers for these systems. When genetic diversity is lost through reduction of population size (Zambrano et al., 2019), evolutionary potential for adaptation is diminished and can reduce a population’s ability to respond to rapid environmental change (Kramer & Haven, 2009). Thus understanding the level of genetic diversity both within and among populations is an essential consideration for coastal management when considering which populations to prioritize for conservation, and from which populations seed should be sourced when attempting to revegete degraded marshes. 

*Spartina alterniflora*, also know as *Sporobolus alterniflora*, is a dominant low-marsh plant found in the most heavily indunated seaward edge of the marsh. Previous studies have found significant levels of within-population genetic diversity (Hughes & Lotteros) and genetic differentiation among populations (Blum). A recent study by [Zerebecki et al. 2021](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/716512?casa_token=81ZmvLXFw6QAAAAA%3Abp0plFHqk9asQU_zYnUOOeXsb5AG42Zo3xZRHV_xrFY7GyrK--ZhA_AsE_KaiJzHTbcVhEhF) used SNP analysis to compare *Spartina* populations from eleven marshes in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida. 
